Open access publishing
CERN has initiated an open access publishing project to convert scientiﬁc articles in high energy physics into gold open access by redirecting subscription fees. In the ﬁrst phase from 2014-2016 3,000 libraries, consortia, research organisations, publishers and funding
agencies in various countries participated.[70] All publications by CERN authors are published with gold open access.[71]

Public exhibits
Facilities at CERN open to the public include:
The Globe of Science and Innovation, which opened in late 2005 and is used four times a week for special exhibits.
The Microcosm museum on particle physics and CERN history.
CERN also provides daily tours to certain facilities such as the Synchro-cyclotron (CERNs ﬁrst particle accelerator) and the superconducting magnet workshop.

In popular culture
The band Les Horribles Cernettes was founded by women from CERN. The name was chosen so to have the same initials as the LHC. [72][73]
CERN's Large Hadron Collider is the subject of a (scientiﬁcally accurate) rap video starring Katherine McAlpine with some of the facility's staﬀ.[74][75]
Particle Fever, a 2013 documentary, explores CERN throughout the inside and depicts the events surrounding the 2012 discovery of the Higgs Boson

The Globe of Science and
Innovation at CERN

CERN is depicted in an episode of South Park (Season 13, Episode 6) called "Pinewood Derby". Randy Marsh, the father of one of the main characters, breaks into the "Hadron
Particle Super Collider in Switzerland" and steals a "superconducting bending magnet created for use in tests with particle acceleration" to use in his son Stan's Pinewood
Derby racer. Randy breaks into CERN dressed in disguise as Princess Leia from the Star Wars saga. The break-in is captured on surveillance tape which is then broadcast on
the news.[76]
John Titor, a self-proclaimed time traveler, alleged that CERN would invent time travel in 2001.
CERN is depicted in the visual novel/anime series Steins;Gate as SERN, a shadowy organization that has been researching time travel in order to restructure and control the
world.
In Dan Brown's mystery-thriller novel Angels & Demons and ﬁlm of the same name, a canister of antimatter is stolen from CERN.[77]
In the popular children's series The 39 Clues, CERN is said to be an Ekaterina stronghold hiding the clue hydrogen.
In Robert J. Sawyer's science ﬁction novel Flashforward, at CERN, the Large Hadron Collider accelerator is performing a run to search for the Higgs boson when the entire
human race sees themselves twenty-one years and six months in the future.

Line 18 goes to CERN

In season 3 episode 15 of the TV sitcom The Big Bang Theory titled "The Large Hadron Collision", Leonard and Raj travel to CERN to attend a conference and see the LHC.
The 2012 student ﬁlm Decay, which centers on the idea of the Large Hadron Collider transforming people into zombies, was ﬁlmed on location in CERN's maintenance tunnels. [78]
The Compact Muon Solenoid at CERN was used as the basis for the Megadeth's Super Collider album cover.
In Super Lovers, Haruko (Ren's mother) worked at CERN, and Ren was taught by CERN professors
CERN forms part of the back story of the massively multiplayer augmented reality game Ingress.[79]
In season 10 episode 6 of the BBC TV show Doctor Who titled "Extremis", CERN and its physicists are involved in a mysterious plot involving a book that causes everyone who reads it to kill themselves.
In 2015, Sarah Charley, US communications manager for LHC experiments at CERN with graduate students Jesse Heilman of the University of California, Riverside, and Tom Perry and Laser Seymour Kaplan of the
University of Wisconsin, Madison created a parody video (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-1AF7GwAxfI) of “Collide” a song by American artist Howie Day.[80] The lyrics were changed to be from the
perspective of a proton in the Large Hadron Collider. After seeing the parody, Day re-recorded the song with the new lyrics and in February, 2017 Day released this new version of "Collide" in a video
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1YB0xM9cgr8) created during his visit to CERN.[81]

See also
CERN portal
Joint Institute for Nuclear Research

Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek

SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory

CERN Openlab

Science and Technology Facilities council

World Wide Web

Fermilab

Science and technology in Switzerland

Large Hadron Collider – Wikipedia book

Scientiﬁc Linux

9

